chore: add testing documentation and coverage checks (#1147)
finos/git-proxy: website/docs/development/testing.mdx

---
title: Testing
---

## Testing

> As of v1.19.2, GitProxy uses [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) (`ts-mocha`) as the test runner, and [Chai](https://www.chaijs.com/) for unit test assertions. End-to-end (E2E) tests are written in [Cypress](https://docs.cypress.io), and some fuzz testing is done with [`fast-check`](https://fast-check.dev/).

Reviewer: Are the Cypress tests E2E? They're not handling the proxy  but the rather just the admin UI and hence only part of application.

```suggestion
As of v1.19.2, GitProxy uses [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) (`ts-mocha`) as the test runner, and [Chai](https://www.chaijs.com/) for unit test assertions. User interface tests are written in [Cypress](https://docs.cypress.io), and some fuzz testing is done with [`fast-check`](https://fast-check.dev/).
```

Author: Good point! I thought of them as E2E since they handle the _entire_ flow from UI to API and back again. But you're right that the proxy code never gets tested here, and there is currently no way to test the proxy through the UI...

    // Initialize the user config after proxyquiring to load the stubbed config
    config.initUserConfig();

    expect(() => config.getAuthMethods()).to.throw(Error, 'No authentication method enabled');
  });

  it('should return an array of enabled auth methods when overridden', async function () {
    const newConfig = JSON.stringify({
      authentication: [
        { type: 'local', enabled: true },
        { type: 'ActiveDirectory', enabled: true },
        { type: 'openidconnect', enabled: true },
      ],
    });

    const fsStub = {
      existsSync: sinon.stub().returns(true),
      readFileSync: sinon.stub().returns(newConfig),
    };

    const config = proxyquire('../src/config', {
      fs: fsStub,
    });

    // Initialize the user config after proxyquiring to load the stubbed config
    config.initUserConfig();

    const authMethods = config.getAuthMethods();
    expect(authMethods).to.have.lengthOf(3);
    expect(authMethods[0].type).to.equal('local');
    expect(authMethods[1].type).to.equal('ActiveDirectory');
    expect(authMethods[2].type).to.equal('openidconnect');
  });
});
```

Core concepts to keep in mind when unit testing JS/TS modules with Chai:

> #### Stub internal methods to make tests predictable

Reviewer: Need to emphasize resetting sinon and a the proxyquire cache after the tests - in #1164 I spent a ton of time trying to debug a weird issue that turned out to be stubs from other tests leaking into subsequent ones (there may be more cases than I fixed).

```js
const config = proxyquire('../src/config', {
  fs: fsStub,
});

// Initialize the user config after proxyquiring to load the stubbed config
config.initUserConfig();
```

Finally, when calling the function we're trying to test, the internal calls will automatically resolve to the values we chose.

#### Setup and cleanup

`before` and `beforeEach`, `after` and `afterEach` are testing constructs that allow executing code before and after each test. This allows setting up stubs before each test, making API calls, setting up the database - or otherwise cleaning up the database after test execution.

This is an example from another test file (`test/addRepoTest.test.js`):

```js
before(async function () {
  app = await service.start();

  await db.deleteRepo('test-repo');
  await db.deleteUser('u1');
  await db.deleteUser('u2');
  await db.createUser('u1', 'abc', 'test@test.com', 'test', true);
  await db.createUser('u2', 'abc', 'test2@test.com', 'test', true);
});

// Tests go here

after(async function () {
  await service.httpServer.close();

  await db.deleteRepo('test-repo');
  await db.deleteUser('u1');
  await db.deleteUser('u2');

> });

Reviewer: Probably worth including a small sinon example and subsequent reset in after - see earlier comment about emphasizing the reset.

Author: Done!

```js
describe('auth methods', async () => {
  it('should return a local auth method by default', async function () {
    // Test goes here
  });

  it('should return an error if no auth methods are enabled', async function () {
    // Test goes here
  });

  it('should return an array of enabled auth methods when overridden', async function () {
    // Test goes here
  });
});
```

Assertions can also be done similarly to plain English:

```js
expect(authMethods).to.have.lengthOf(3);
expect(authMethods[0].type).to.equal('local');
```

#### Unit testing coverage requirement

**All new lines of code introduced in a PR, must have over 80% coverage** (patch coverage). This is enforced by our CI, and generally a PR will not be merged unless this coverage requirement is met. Please make sure to write thorough unit tests to increase GitProxy's code quality!

If test coverage is still insufficient after writing your tests, check out the [CodeCov report](https://app.codecov.io/gh/finos/git-proxy) after making the PR and take a look at which lines are missing coverage.

> ### E2E testing with Cypress

Reviewer: E2E or UI? See previous comment
